# exoplanet_detection
EXOPLANET DISCOVERIES THROUGH DATA SCIENCE

   Humans have been exploring the heavens since some 4000 years ago stemming from ancient Babylon into Greek, Arabic, European and Indo-china cultures and languages. Through observations and theories, Greek Geocentric theory in 400BC was the idea that stars/planets were orbiting the earth. But it was not until the 17th century that major discoveries took place. Copernicus challenged geocentric ideas with heliocentric. Galileo invented the telescope. Johannes Kepler developed planetary laws of motion.
   
   Hindsight tells us that, being diligent in their observations, explorers and scientists became more profound and scientific in their conclusions through the ages. 

   From geocentric beliefs to helo-centric(Copernicus) ideas, 17th century astronomers faced scepticism and ridicule for their beliefs about the workings of 'the heavens' and most of these beliefs are still true today. Standing on the shoulders of their predecessors, were Johannes Kepler and Sir Issac Newton, early and late 17th century astronomers/mathematicians respectively. Just as Kepler(Tycho Brahe) is responsible for the laws of planetary motion, Newton is responsible for laws of motion.   

   In this Data Science study, using Kepler and Newtons ideas along with some coding we will explore planets and planetary orbits outside of earths solar system.  

1. Import proper libraries

2. Import stats on planet discoveries from file produced by the NASA Exoplanet Archive  http://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu. This file is used in 1_planet_info.ipynb notebook.

3. Read and Plot A TESS Light Curve from the github: https://github.com/spacetelescope/notebooks/blob/master/notebooks/MAST/TESS/beginner_how_to_use_lc/beginner_how_to_use_lc.ipynb
The first few lines of code are used in file 2_light_curve_plot.ipynb for importing a .fit light curve.

4. Import datasets obtained from:

https://www.kaggle.com/keplersmachines/kepler-labelled-time-series-data
    
   These are datasets made public by NASA and available on the Kaggle website. According to Kaggle, after being beamed down to Earth, NASA applies de-noising algorithms to remove artefacts generated by the telescope. Taken over the course of 80 days with ~30 minute intervals. The majority of 'space' data in the form of light energies is highly dependent on time i.e. timeseries data and for a Transit method of finding an exoplanet via it's host star time series analysis is used.
   
5. Memory reduction on both train and test sets of data.
   
   Create a function that loops through the columns and modify's the datatype with less memory use.
6. A very good resource for preparing the data is:

https://towardsdatascience.com/exoplanet-hunting-using-machine-learning-d615958e1787
   
   
  
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1LPSnOsjizV8cHYn62lUWA4nNYYyW_bZo2snQ637I1wc/edit?usp=sharing01. 
Presentation Outline:

EXOPLANET DISCOVERY
02. Intro/History statement
03. Overview: 
04. Problem Statement: Can data science solve the search for exoplanets
05. About the data
06. Perspective
07. The Data Challenge
08. The Hunt
09. Detection Techniques
10. Latest Data from Nasa
11. Survey of methods (plot)
12. Transit method -video
13. Time Series Plot
14. So What Can We Learn more about
15. Model for planet detection
16. Data Preprocessing
17. Dimensionality Reduction
18. Class Imbalance
19. Model Comparisons  
20. Model Comparisons (cont..)
21. Confusion Matrix
22. Next Steps
23. References

